add markdown files for agentic models (#3048)
speechbrain/speechbrain: AGENTS.md

**PaddedBatch** (`speechbrain.dataio.batch`) is the collate function. It pads variable-length tensors and returns `PaddedData(data, lengths)` namedtuples. Always unpack: `wavs, wav_lens = batch.sig`. The `lengths` are relative (0.0–1.0). Use `SaveableDataLoader` instead of raw `DataLoader` — it supports checkpoint-resumable iteration.

**DynamicBatchSampler** (`speechbrain.dataio.sampler`) groups utterances into length-bucketed batches with a target total duration instead of a fixed batch size. Requires a `length_func` pointing to the manifest duration field. Do not pass `batch_size` when using `batch_sampler`.

**CategoricalEncoder** (`speechbrain.dataio.encoder`) maps string labels to integer indices for classification. Fit with `encoder.update_from_didataset(train_data, "spk_id")`, use `encoder.encode_label_torch(label)` inside a pipeline, sanity-check with `encoder.expect_len(num_classes)`.

Every recipe wires this together in a `dataio_prep(hparams)` function — follow this pattern for new recipes.

> ## Recipe conventions

Reviewer: Should we actually have additional `AGENTS.md` files in key top-level folders as well? Like one for recipes, one for tests, one for speechbrain folder itself? Just wondering if it might be helpful to have more specific instructions depending on what the agent is trying to do.

> Every recipe lives at `recipes/{dataset}/{task}/{mdeol}` and follows this structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every recipe lives at `recipes/{dataset}/{task}/{model}` and follows this structure:
```

- `prepare_{dataset}.py` — the data preparation script. It read the dataset structure and creates the CSV or JSON manifests with the correct format (e.g. duration, speaker id, etc.).
- `hparams/*.yaml` — HyperPyYAML files. There may be multiple configs for different model variants.
- `README.md` — documents results (WER, EER, etc.), how to run, and links to pretrained models on HuggingFace.
- `extra_requirements.txt` — if the recipe needs packages not in core requirements.

To run a recipe:
```bash
cd recipes/{dataset}/{task}/{model}
python train.py hparams/train.yaml --data_folder /path/to/data
```

When creating a new recipe, start from `templates/` for a minimal working skeleton.

## Running tests

```bash
# Run pre-commit checks (formatting, linting via ruff)
pre-commit run -a

# Run doctests
pytest --doctest-modules speechbrain/path/to/module.py

# Run unit tests
pytest tests/unittests/

# Run a specific integration test
pytest tests/integration/ASR_CTC/ -xvs

# Run all integration tests
pytest tests/integration/ -x
```

> Pre-commit hooks are configured in `.pre-commit-config.yaml` and enforce formatting/linting automatically. Always run `pre-commit run -a` before opening a PR.

Reviewer: Not sure how installing the pre-commit hooks interacts with agents here. Looks like this assumes the agent will always manually run the tests rather than installing the hook. Just wanted to check that this is what we want to do, as it seems there is some risk of the agent forgetting this part (which is not the end of the world but could be annoying I guess).

## Code style

- **Formatting and linting**: enforced by `ruff` via pre-commit. Run `pre-commit run -a`.
- **Docstrings**: NumPy-style. Every public class/function needs a docstring with description, arguments, returns, and a runnable example. Doctests are enforced by CI.
- **Self-documenting code**: prefer clear naming over comments. Use comments for surprising implementations or algorithm clarifications.
- **Minimize dependencies**: core library should stay lightweight. Recipe-specific deps go in `extra_requirements.txt`. If adding to core but the dependency is heavy, put it in `speechbrain/integrations/`.
- **Efficiency**: operate on batches, prefer tensor ops over Python loops, avoid CPU/GPU syncs.

## Common pitfalls

- **HyperPyYAML is not plain YAML**: do not treat `.yaml` files as simple config. `!new:` instantiates objects, `!ref` resolves references. Editing these files requires understanding the tag system. If you break a `!ref` chain, training will crash at load time.
- **Relative lengths, not absolute**: SpeechBrain passes relative lengths (0 to 1) for masking/padding. Do not pass absolute sample counts where relative lengths are expected.

> - **modules vs hparams**: objects listed under `modules:` in the YAML are registered as `nn.Module`s on the Brain (moved to device, included in DDP, saved in checkpoints). Objects accessed via `self.hparams.*` are not. Putting a trainable module only in hparams means it won't be on the right device or saved properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **modules vs hparams**: objects listed under `modules:` in the YAML are registered as `nn.Module`s on the Brain (moved to device, included in DDP). Objects accessed via `self.hparams.*` are not. Putting a trainable module only in hparams means it won't be on the right device or saved properly.
```

The "saved in checkpoints" is unrelated to "modules" I think.

- **Stage-dependent logic**: always check `stage` before computing validation-only metrics or applying train-only augmentation. Forgetting this causes training-time metric computation (slow) or test-time augmentation (wrong results).
- **Batch format**: batch objects from the dataio pipeline are `PaddedBatch` instances. Access signals as `batch.sig` which returns `(tensor, lengths)` tuples. Do not index batch like a plain dict.
- **Checkpointing**: Brain's checkpointer saves/loads modules, optimizers, schedulers, and epoch counters. If you add a new trainable module, register it with the checkpointer or it won't be saved/restored.

> - **Soundfile vs torchaudio**: SpeechBrain is migrating audio I/O from torchaudio to soundfile. Use `speechbrain.dataio.dataio.read_audio` for reading audio, not raw torchaudio calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Soundfile vs torchaudio**: SpeechBrain uses a soundfile backend for audio I/O. Use `speechbrain.dataio.dataio.read_audio` for reading audio, not raw torchaudio calls.
```

## Pretrained models and inference

SpeechBrain hosts pretrained models on HuggingFace at `huggingface.co/speechbrain/`. Inference interfaces in `speechbrain.inference` provide simple APIs:

```python
from speechbrain.inference.ASR import EncoderDecoderASR
asr = EncoderDecoderASR.from_hparams(source="speechbrain/asr-crdnn-rnnlm-librispeech")
transcription = asr.transcribe_file("audio.wav")
```

The `from_hparams` method downloads the model and YAML from HuggingFace, loads via HyperPyYAML, and returns a ready-to-use object.

## Key dependencies

- PyTorch (core)
- HyperPyYAML (`hyperpyyaml` package — SpeechBrain's extended YAML, separate repo at `speechbrain/HyperPyYAML`)
- soundfile (audio I/O)

> - torchaudio (some legacy audio I/O, being phased out)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- torchaudio (basic feature transforms, resampling, etc.)
```
